The Adventures of Tom Sawyer by Mark Twain.
To my wife, this book is affectionately dedicated.
Preface.
Most of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred. One or two
were experiences of my own, the rest those of boys who were schoolmates
of mine. Huck Finn is drawn from life, Tom Sawyer also, but not from an
individual. He is a combination of the characteristics of three boys
whom I knew, and therefore belongs to the composite order of architecture.
The odds superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children
and slaves in the West at the period of this story, that is to say thirty
or forty years ago. Although my book is intended mainly for the
entertainment of boys and girls, I hope it will not be shunned by men
and women on that account, for part of my plan has been to try to
pleasantly remind adults of what they once were themselves, and of how
they felt and thought and talked, and what queer enterprises they
sometimes engaged in.
The Author. Hartford. 1876.
CHAPTER I.
No answer.
Tom?
What's gone with that boy, I wonder? You, Tom?
No answer. The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them
about the room, then she put them up and looked out under them. She
They were her state-pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for
style, not service. She could have seen through a pair of stove-lids
just as well. She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not
fiercely, but still loud enough for the furniture to hear,
"'Well, I lay, if I get hold of you, I'll--" She did not finish, for by
this time she was bending down and punching under the bed with a broom,
and so she needed breath to punctuate the punches with. She resurrected
nothing but the cat. I never see the beat of that boy! She went to the
open door and stood in it, and looked out among the tomato-vines and
jimson-weeds that constituted the garden. No, Tom. So she lifted up her
voice at an angle calculated for distance, and shouted,
"'You, Tom!' There was a slight noise behind her, and she turned just
in time to seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout, and arrest
his flight. There! I might a thought of that closet. What you been
doing in there? Nothing? Nothing? Look at your hands, and look at your
mouth. What is that truck? I don't know, Aunt. Well, I know. It's jam,
that's what it is. Forty times I've said, if you didn't let that jam
alone, I'll skin you. Hand me that switch."
The switch hovered in the air. The peril was desperate.
"'My! Look behind you, Aunt!'
The old lady whirled round and snatched her skirts out of danger. The
lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence and
disappeared over it. His Aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then
broke into a gentle laugh.
"'Hang that boy! Can't I never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks
enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time? But old
fools is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks,
as the saying is. But, my goodness, he never plays them alike two days,
and how is a body to know what's coming? He peers to know just how long
he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he can
make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down
again and I can't hit him a lick. I ain't doing my duty by that, boy,
and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and smile
at the child, as the Good Book says. I'm a-laying up sin and sufferin'
for us both, I know. He's full of the old scratch but laws of me. He's
my own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash
him somehow. Every time I let him off my conscience does hurt me so,
and every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well, well, a man
that is born of a woman is a few days and full of trouble, as the
evening. That's south-western for afternoon. And I'll just be
obliged to make him work tomorrow to punish him. It's mighty hard to
make him work Saturdays when all the boys is having holiday, but he
hates work more than he hates anything else, and I've got to do some of
my duty by him, or I'll be the ruination of the child.
Tom did play hooky, and he had a very good time. He got back, home
barely in season to help Jim, the small-colored boy, saw next day's
wood, and split the kindling before supper. At least he was there in
time to tell his adventures to Jim, while Jim did three-fourths of the
work. Tom's younger brother, or rather half-brother, Sid, was already
through with his part of the work, picking up chips, for he was a
quiet boy and had no adventurous, troublesome ways. While Tom was
eating his supper and stealing sugar as opportunity offered, Aunt
Polly asked him questions that were full of guile and very deep, for
she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like many other
simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed
with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to
contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low cunning.
Said she,
Tom, it was middling warm in school, wasn't it? Yesen. Powerful warm,
wasn't it? Yesen. Didn't you want to go in a swimmin', Tom? A bit of a
scare shot through Tom, a touch of uncomfortable suspicion. He searched
Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing, so he said,
No, well, not very much.
The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said,
But you ain't too warm now, though! And it flattered her to reflect that
she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that
that was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew where
the wind lay now, so he forestalled what might be the next move.
Some of us pumped on our heads, minds damp yet, see?
Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of
circumstantial evidence and missed a trick. Then she had a new
Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to
pump on your head, did you? Unbutton your jacket.
The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His
shirt collar was securely sewed.
Bother! Well, go along with you. I'd made sure you'd played hooky and
been a swimmin', but I forgive you, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of
singed cat, as the saying is. Better in your look. This time.
She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom
had stumbled into obedient conduct for once. But Sidney said,
Well, now if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread,
but it's black.
Why, I did sew it with white. Tom!
But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out the door, he said,
City, I'll lick you for that.
In a safe place, Tom examined two large needles, which were thrust
into the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them. One
needle carried white thread, and the other black. He said,
She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Con found it. Sometimes
she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to
Jiminy she'd stick to one or t'other. I can't keep the run of them. But
I bet I'll learn Sid for that. I'll learn him.
He was not the model boy of the village. He knew the model boy very
well, though, and loathed him.
Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles.
Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him
than a man's are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest
bore them down, and drove them out of his mind for the time. Just as
men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises.
This new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just
acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practice it undisturbed.
It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble,
produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short
intervals in the midst of the music. The reader probably remembers how
to do it, if he has ever been a boy.
Diligence and attention soon gave him the knack of it, and he strode
down the street with his mouth full of harmony and his soul full of
gratitude. He felt much as an astronomer feels who has discovered a
new planet. No doubt, as far as strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is
concerned, the advantage was with a boy, not the astronomer.
The summer evenings were long. It was not dark yet. Presently Tom
checked his whistle. A stranger was before him, a boy a shade larger
than himself. A newcomer of any age or either sex was an impressive
curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg. This
was simply astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned
blue cloth round about was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons.
He had shoes on, and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a
bright bit of ribbon. He had acidified air about him that ate into Tom's
vitals. The more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he
turned up his nose at his finery, and the shabbier and shabbier his own
outfit seemed to him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the
other moved, but only sidewise, in a circle. They kept face to face and
eye to eye all the time. Finally Tom said,
I can lick you.
I'd like to see you try it.
Well, I can do it.
No, you can't either.
Yes, I can.
No, you can't.
I can.
You can't.
Can't.
An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said,
What's your name?
It isn't any of your business, maybe.
Well, I'll make it my business.
Well, why don't you?
If you say much, I will.
Much, much, much. There, now.
Oh, you think you're mighty smart, don't you? I could lick you with one
hand tied behind me if I wanted to.
Well, why don't you do it? You say you can do it.
Well, I will, if you fool with me.
Oh, yes, I've seen whole families in the same fix.
Smarty, you think you're some, now, don't you? Oh, what a hat!
You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it
off. And anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs.
You're a liar.
You're another.
You're a fighting liar and doesn't take it up.
Ah, take a walk.
Say, if you give me much more of your sass, I'll take and bounce a
rock off in your head.
Oh, of course you will.
Well, I will.
Well, why don't you do it, then?
Why do you keep saying you will for? Why don't you do it? It's
because you're afraid.
I ain't afraid.
You are.
I ain't.
Another pause, and more eyeing and sidling around each other.
Presently they were shoulder to shoulder, Tom said.
Get away from me. Go away yourself. I won't.
Well, I won't, either.
So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and
both shoving with might and mane and glowering at each other with
hate. But neither could get an advantage. After struggling till both
were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution,
and Tom said,
You're a coward and a pup. I'll tell my big brother on you, and he can
thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too.
Who do I care for your big brother? I've got a brother that's bigger
than he is, and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too.
Both brothers were imaginary.
That's a lie! Your saying so doesn't make it so.
Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said,
I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand
up. Anybody that'll take a dare will steal sheep.
The new boy stepped over promptly, and said,
Now you said you'd do it. Now let's see you do it. Don't you crowd me
now. You'd better look out.
Well, you said you'd do it. Why don't you do it? Buy jingo for two
pence, I will do it.
The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket, and held them out
with derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys
were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats, and
for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair
and clothes, punched and scratched each other's noses, and covered
themselves with dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form,
and through the fog of battle Tom appeared seated astride the new boy,
and pounding him with his fists.
Holler nuff! said he. The boy only struggled to free himself. He was
crying, mainly from rage.
Holler nuff! and the pounding went on. At last the stranger got out of
smothered. Nuff! and Tom let him up, and said, Now that'll learn you.
Better look out who you're fooling with next time.
The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing,
snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and
threatening what he would do to Tom the next time he caught him out,
to which Tom responded with jeers and started off in a high feather,
and as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone,
threw it, and hit him between the shoulders, and then turned tail and
ran like an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out
where he lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time,
daring the enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him
through the window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared,
called Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he
went away, but he said he allowed to lay for that boy. He got home
pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in at the
window he uncovered an ambuscade in the person of his aunt, and when
she saw the state his clothes were in, her resolution to turn his
Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its
firmness.
CHAPTER II THE GLORIOUS WHITE-WASHER
Saturday morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and
fresh and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart, and if
the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in
every face, and a spring in every step. The locust trees were in bloom,
and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill,
beyond the village and above it, was green with vegetation, and it
lay just far enough away to seem a delectable land, dreamy, reposeful
and inviting. Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash
and a long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left
him, and a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards
of bored fence nine feet high, life to him seemed hollow, an existence
but a burden. Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the
topmost plank, repeated the operation, did it again, compared the
insignificant whitewash streak with a far-reaching continent of
un-whitewashed fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged. Jim came
out at the gate with a tin pail and singing Buffalo Gals. Bringing
water from the town pump had always been hateful work in Tom's eyes
before, but now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there was
company at the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were
always there waiting their turns, resting, trading, playthings,
quarreling, fighting, skylarking, and he remembered that although the
pump was only a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a
bucket of water under an hour, and even then somebody generally had to
go after him. Tom said,
"'Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some.'
Jim shook his head and said,
"'Can't, Mars Tom. Old Mrs. she told me I got to go and get this water
and stop fooling around with anybody. She say she spec'd Mars Tom
going to ask me to whitewash, and so she told me to go long and tend to
my own business. She loud she'd tend to whitewashing. Oh, never mind
what she said, Jim. That's the way she always talks. Give me the
bucket. I won't be gone only a minute. She won't ever know. Oh, I
dazzle Mars Tom. Old Mrs. she takin' tar to head off in me. Deed she
would.'
"'She never licks anybody, whacks him over the head with her thimble,
and who cares for that, I'd like to know. She talks awful, but talk
hurt. Anyways, it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you a marvel.
I'll give you a white alley.'
Jim began to wave her.
"'White alley, Jim. And it's a bully-tall.'
"'Mah, that's a mighty gay marvel, I tell you. But Mars Tom, I's
powerful, afraid old Mrs. and besides, if you will, I'll show you my
sore toe.' Jim was only human. This attraction was too much for him. He
put down his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with
absorbing interest while the bandage was being unwound. In another
moment he was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear.
Tom was whitewashing with vigour, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the
field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye. But Tom's
energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had planned for
his day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys would come
tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and they would
make a world of fun of him for having to work. The very thought of it
burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and examined it—bits
of toys, marbles, and trash—enough to buy an exchange of work, maybe,
but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour of pure freedom. So
he returned his straightened means to his pocket and gave up the idea of
trying to buy the boys. At this dark and hopeless moment an inspiration
burst upon him—nothing less than a great magnificent inspiration. He
took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in sight
presently—the very boy of all boys, whose ridicule he had been
dreading. Ben's gait was the hop, skip, and jump, proof enough that his
heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and
giving a long, melodious whoop at intervals, followed by a deep-toned
ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a steamboat. As he
drew near he slackened speed, took the middle of the road, leaned far
over to starboard, and rounded to, ponderously and with laborious pomp
and circumstance, for he was personating the Big Missouri, and considered
himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat and captain and
engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing on his own
hurricane deck giving the orders and executing them.
Stop her, sir! Ding-a-ling-a-ling! The headway ran almost out, and he
drew up slowly towards the sidewalk. Ship up to back! Ding-a-ling-a-ling!
His arms straightened and stiffened down his sides. Set her back on the
starboard! Ding-a-ling-a-ling! Chow! Chow! Chow! Chow! Chow! His right
hand, meantime, described stately circles, for it was representing a 40
foot wheel. Let her go back on the starboard! Ding-a-ling-a-ling! Chow!
Chow! Chow! The left hand began to describe circles. Stop the starboard!
Ding-a-ling-a-ling! Stop the starboard! Come ahead on the starboard!
Stop her! Let her outside! Turn her over slow! Ding-a-ling! Chow! Chow!
Get out that headline! Lively, now! Come! Come out of there with your
spring line! What are you about there? Take up a turn in that stump
with the bright of it! Stand by that stage! Now let her go! Done with
the engine, sir! Ding-a-ling-a-ling! Chit! Chit! Chit! Chit!
Trying the gauge-cocks, Tom went on whitewashing, paid no attention to
the steamboat. Ben stared a moment and then said,
Hi-ee! You're up a stump, ain't you?
No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then
he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result as
before. Ben ranged up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the
apple, but he stuck to his work. Ben said,
Hello, old chap! You got to work, eh?
Tom wheeled suddenly and said,
Why, it's you, Ben. I weren't noticing. Say, I'm going in a swimming.
I am. Don't you wish you could? But of course you'd rather work,
wouldn't you? Of course you would. Tom contemplated the boy a bit and
said,
What do you call work?
Why, ain't that work? Tom resumed his whitewashing and answered
carelessly,
Well, maybe it is and maybe it ain't. All I know is it suits Tom Sawyer.
Oh, come, now, you don't mean to let on that you like that.
The brush continued to move.
Like it? Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get a
chance to whitewash a fence every day?
That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nibbling his apple.
Tom swept his brush daintily, back and forth, stepped back to note the
effect, added a touch here and there, criticized the effect again. Ben,
watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and
more absorbed. Presently he said,
Say, Tom, let me whitewash a little.
Tom considered, was about to consent, but he altered his mind.
No, no, I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see Aunt Polly's awful
particular about this fence, right here on the street, you know. But if
it was the back fence I wouldn't mind and she wouldn't. Yes, she's
awful particular about this fence. It's got to be done very careful. I
reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand—maybe two thousand—that
can do it the way it's got to be done.
No, is that so? Oh, come now, let me just try. Only just a little. I'd
let you if you was me, Tom.
Ben, I'd like to. Honest, Injun. But Aunt Polly—
Well, Jim wanted to do it, but she wouldn't let him. Sid wanted to do
it, and she wouldn't let Sid. Now, don't you see how I'm fixed? If you
was to tackle this fence and anything was to happen to it—aw, shucks,
I'll be just as careful. Now let me try. Say, I'll give you the core of
my apple.
Well, here. No, no, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard. I'll give you all of
it.
Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his
heart, and while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in
the sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by,
dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more
innocence. There was no lack of material. Boys happened along every
little while. They came to jeer, but remained to whitewash. By the time
Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for
a kite in good repair. And when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in
for a dead rat on a string to swing it with, and so on and so on hour
after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a
poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in
wealth. He had beside the things before mentioned twelve marbles, part
of a Jew's harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through, a spool
cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk, a
glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six
firecrackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass doorknob, a dog collar
but no dog, the handle of a knife, four pieces of orange peel, and a
dilapidated old window-sash. He had had a nice, good, idle time all the
while, plenty of company, and the fence had had three coats of
whitewash on it. If he hadn't run out of whitewash, he would have
bankrupted every boy in the village.
Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world after all. He
had discovered a great law of human action without knowing it, namely,
that in order to make a man or boy covet a thing, it is only necessary
to make the thing difficult to attain. If he had been a great and wise
philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have
comprehended that work consists of whatever a body is obliged to do,
and that play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do. And
this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers
or performing on a treadmill is work, while rolling tenpins or climbing
Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy gentlemen in England
who drive four-horse passenger coaches twenty or thirty miles on a
daily line in the summer because the privilege costs them considerable
money. But if they were offered wages for the service, that would turn
it into work, and then they would resign. The boy mused a while over
the substantial change which had taken place in his worldly
circumstances, and then wended toward headquarters to report.